what was the most difficult job you ever
did was it working in the Sun was it
working to provide food for a family or
a community was it working days and
nights trying to protect lives and
property was it working alone
or working on a project that wasn't
guaranteed to succeed but that might
improve human health or save a life was
it working to build something create
something make a work of art was it work
for which you were never sure you were
fully understood or appreciated the
people in our communities who do these
jobs deserve our attention our love and
our deepest support but people aren't
the only ones in our communities who do
these difficult jobs these jobs are also
done by the plants the animals and the
ecosystems on our planet including the
ecosystems I study the tropical coral
reefs coral reefs are farmers they
provide food income and food security
for hundreds of millions of people
around the world coral reefs are
security guards the structures that they
build protect our shorelines from storm
surge and waves and the biological
systems that they house filter the water
and make it safer for us to work and
play coral reefs are chemists the
molecules that were discovering on coral
reefs are increasingly important in the
search for new antibiotics and new
cancer drugs and coral reefs are artists
the structures that they build are some
of the most beautiful things on planet
earth and this beauty is a foundation of
the tourism industry in many countries
with few or little other natural
resources so for all of these reasons
all of these ecosystem services
economists estimate the value of the
world's coral reefs in the hundreds of
billions of dollars per year and yet
despite all that hard work being done
for us and all that wealth that we gain
we have done almost everything we
possibly could to destroy that we have
taken the fish out of the oceans and we
have
added in fertilizer sewage diseases oil
pollution sediments we have trampled the
reefs physically with our boats our fins
our bulldozers and we have changed the
chemistry of the entire sea warmed the
waters and made storms worse and these
would all be bad on their own but these
threats magnify each other and compound
one another and make each other worse
I'll give you an example where I live
and work in Curacao a tropical storm
went by a few years ago and on the
eastern end of the island where the
reefs are intact and thriving you could
barely tell a tropical storm had passed
but in town where corals had died from
overfishing from pollution the tropical
storm picked up the dead corals and used
them as bludgeons to kill the corals
that were left this is a curl that I
studied during my PhD I got to know it
quite well and after this storm took off
half of its tissue it became infested
with algae the algae overgrew the tissue
in that coral died this magnification of
threats this compounding of factors is
what jeremy jackson describes as the
slippery slope to slime it's hardly even
a metaphor because many of our reefs now
are literally bacteria and algae and
slime now this is the part of the talk
where you may expect me to launch into
my plea for us to all save the coral
reefs but I have a confession to make
that phrase drives me nuts
whether I see it in a tweet in a news
headline or the glossy pages of a
conservation brochure that phrase
bothers me because we as
conservationists have been sounding the
alarms about the death of coral reefs
for decades and yet almost everyone I
meet no matter how educated is not sure
what a coral is or where they come from
how would we get someone to care about
the world's coral reefs when it's an
abstract thing they can barely
understand if they don't understand what
a coral is or where it comes from or how
funny or interesting it or beautiful it
is why would we expect them to care
about saving them so let's change that
what is a coral and where does it come
from
korells are born in a number of
different ways but most often by mass
spawning all the individuals of a single
species on y9t deer releasing all the
eggs they've made that year into the
water column packaged into bundles with
sperm cells and those bundles go to the
surface of the ocean and break apart and
hopefully hopefully at the surface of
the ocean they meet the eggs and sperm
from other corals and that is why you
need lots of corals on a coral reef so
that all of their eggs can meet their
match at the surface when they're
fertilized they do what any other animal
egg does divides in half again and again
and again and taking these photos under
the microscope every year is one of my
favorite and most magical moments of the
year at the end of all this cell
division they turn into a swimming larva
a little tiny blob of fat the size of a
poppy seed but with all of the sensory
systems that we have they can sense
color and light textures chemicals pH
they can even feel pressure waves they
can hear sound and they use those
talents to search the bottom of the reef
for a place to attach and live the rest
of their lives so imagine finding a
place where you would live the rest of
your life when you were just 2 days old
they attach in the place they find most
suitable they build a skeleton
underneath themselves they build a mouth
and tentacles and then they begin the
difficult work of building the world's
coral reefs one coral polyp will divide
itself again and again and again leaving
a limestone skeleton underneath itself
and growing up toward the Sun given
hundreds of years and many species what
you get is a massive limestone structure
that can be seen from space
in many cases covered by a thin skin of
these hard-working animals now there are
only a few hundred species of corals on
the planet maybe a thousand but these
systems house millions and millions of
other species and that diversity is what
stabilizes the systems and it's where
we're finding our new medicines it's how
we find new sources of food I'm lucky
enough to work on the island of curacao
where we still have reefs that look like
this but indeed much of the Caribbean
and much of our world is much more like
this
scientists have studied in increasing
detail the loss of the world's coral
reefs and they have documented with
increasing certainty the causes but in
my research I'm not interested in
looking backward my colleagues and I in
Curacao are interested in looking
forward at what might be and we have the
tiniest reason to be optimistic because
even in some of these reefs that we
probably could have written off long ago
we sometimes see baby corals arrive and
survive anyway and we're starting to
think that baby corals may have the
ability to adjust to some of the
conditions that the adults couldn't they
may be able to adjust ever so slightly
more readily to this human planet so in
my research in the research I do with my
colleagues in Curacao we tried to figure
out what a baby coral needs in that
critical early stage what it's looking
for and how we can try to help it
through that process I'm going to show
you three examples of the work we've
done to try to answer those questions a
few years ago we took a 3d printer and
we made coral choice surveys different
colors and different textures and we
simply asked the corals where they
preferred to settle and we found that
corals even without the biology involved
still prefer white and pink the colors
of a healthy reef and they prefer
crevices and grooves and holes where
they will be safe from being trampled or
eaten by a predator so we can use this
knowledge we can go back and say we need
to restore those factors that pink that
white those crevices those hard surfaces
in our conservation projects we can also
use that knowledge if we're going to put
something under water like a seawall or
a pier we can choose to use the
materials and colors and textures that
might bias the system back toward those
corals now in addition to the surfaces
we also study the chemical in microbial
signals that attract girls to reefs
starting about six years ago I began
culturing bacteria from surfaces where
corals had settled and I tried those one
by one by one looking for the bacteria
that would convince corals to settle and
attach and we now have many bacterial
strains in our freezer that will
reliably cause corals to go through that
settlement and attach
process so as we speak my colleagues in
Curacao are testing those bacteria to
see if they'll help us raise more coral
settlers in the lab and to see if those
coral settlers will survive better when
we put them back underwater now in
addition to these tools we also try to
uncover the mysteries of species that
are under studied this is one of my
favorite corals and always has been
Dandridge iris Solyndra the pillar coral
I love it because it makes this
ridiculous shape because its tentacles
are fat and look fuzzy and because it's
rare finding one of these on our reef is
a treat in fact it's so rare that last
year it was listed as a threatened
species on the endangered species list
and this was in part because in over 30
years of research surveys scientists had
never found a baby pillar coral we
weren't even sure if they could still
reproduce or if they were still
reproducing so four years ago we started
following these at night and watching to
see if we could figure out when they
spawn in Curacao we got some good tips
from our colleagues in Florida who had
seen one in 2007 one in 2008 and
eventually we figured out when they
spawning Curacao and we caught it here's
a female on the left with some eggs in
her tissue about to release them into
the seawater and here's a male on the
right releasing sperm we collected this
we got it back to the lab we got it to
fertilize and we got baby pillar corals
swimming in our lab thanks to the work
of our scientific aunts and uncles and
thanks to the 10 years of practice we've
had in Curacao at raising other coral
species we got some of those larvae
indeed to go through the rest of the
process and settle in attach and turn
into metamorphosed corals so this is the
first pillar coral baby that anyone ever
saw
and I have to say if you think baby
pandas are cute
this is cuter so we're starting to
figure out the secrets to this process
the secrets of coral reproduction and
how we might help them and this is true
all around the world scientists are
figuring out new ways to handle their
embryos to get them to settle maybe even
figuring out the methods to preserve
them at low temperatures so that we can
preserve their genetic diversity and
work with them more often but this is
still so low-tech we are limited by the
space on our bench the number of hands
in the lab and the number of coffees we
can drink in any given hour now compare
that to our other crises and our other
areas of concern as a society we have
advanced medical technology we have
defense technology we have scientific
technology we even have advanced
technology for art but our technology
for conservation is behind think back to
the most difficult job you ever did many
of you would say it was being a parent
my mother described being a parent as
something that makes your life far more
amazing and far more difficult than you
could have ever possibly imagined now
I've been trying to help corals become
parents for over 10 years now and
watching the wonder of life has
certainly filled me with amazement to
the core of my soul but I've also seen
how difficult it is for them to become
parents the pillar corals spawned again
two weeks ago and we collected their
eggs and brought them back to the lab
and here you see one embryo dividing
alongside 14 eggs that didn't fertilize
and will blow up they'll be infected
with bacteria they will explode and
those bacteria will threaten the life of
this one embryo that has a chance we
don't know if it was our handling
methods that went wrong and we don't or
and we don't know if it was just this
coral on this reef always suffering from
low fertility whatever the cause we have
much more work to do before we can use
bait
girls to grow or fix or yes maybe save
coral reefs so never mind that they're
worth hundreds of billions of dollars
coral reefs are hardworking animals and
plants and microbes and fungi they're
providing us with art and food and
medicine and we almost took out an
entire generation of corals but if you
made it anyway despite our best efforts
and now it's time for us to thank them
for the work they did and give them
every chance they have to raise the
coral reefs of the future they are coral
babies thank you so much